---
title: "Predicting play types in American football with machine learning."
image:
  src: "/football.png"
  alt: "Football field with thewords predicting play types in American football using machine learning written across the whole field"
description: Can you accurately predict if an NFL team will run or pass on a given play?
---

My bachelor thesis dives into using _machine learning_ to predict the types of plays in American football, specifically whether a play will involve _passing or running_ the ball. It goes deeper, providing details about where passes are thrown and where runs are directed on the field. The main focus is on _leveraging specialized knowledge_ about football strategies.

To gather this knowledge, I interviewed head coach of the national team of Austria Max Sommer, who shared crucial insights into how plays are decided. Using this information, different machine learning models were tested: logistic regression, a support vector machine, and a neural network. The support vector machine performed the best, achieving an impressive maximum accuracy score of _87.9%_.

These predictions can be _valuable for defensive coordinators_, helping them anticipate the opposing team's moves. Moreover, the models also offer insights beyond just pass or run, aiding in more detailed play-calling decisions. After testing various features, a set of five key factors proved most effective for prediction. These include the _time left in the game_, the _distance to the goal line_, the _distance needed for a new first down_, the _score difference_, and the offensive team's _past tendency to pass on each down_. The data was taken from the _10 previous seasons_ of the NFL.

Importantly, the models were trained separately for each down and team to capture the unique strategies employed by teams in different situations during a game.

::button-link{href="/predicting_plays.pdf"}
Read the complete thesis
::
